The impact of Mental Health and Well-Being on Students in India
Introduction:
University students’ mental health issues are becoming a major global public health concern, especially in developing regions like Southeast Asia where there are fierce academic competition, financial strain, and cultural expectations. Developing a successful, culturally sensitive interventions require an understanding of how academic, social, and personal pressures affect students’ well-being. The purpose of this study was to investigate how various aspects of student life affect outcomes related to mental health and well-being among college students from Southeast Asia, more specifically India. 

Methods:
Data were drawn from a cross-sectional survey of university students in India designed to assess mental health outcomes and their predictors, from the Kaggle website. After data screening analyses were conducted on a final sample of 70 participants (N = 70). Observations included predictor variables (Gender, Age, Academic Pressure, CGPA, Dietary Habits, Financial Stress and Family History of Mental Illness) and response variables (Depression, Study Satisfaction and Sleep Duration). Principal Component Analysis (PCA) with orthogonal rotation was performed to assess dimensionality and factor structure. Based on the PCA results, Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) was used as the major inferential strategy to model latent structures and analyze associations between predictors and mental health outcomes while controlling measurement error. The SEM demonstrated acceptable fit to the data (RMSEA = 0.051, MFI = 0.959, GFI = 0.902 to name a few), we can indicate that the hypothesized latent structure adequately represents the observed relationships.


Results:
PCA favored a distinct factor structure with strong communalities for academic pressure, dietary habits, financial stress, and a family history of mental illness. SEM results showed that Study Satisfaction was the only statistically significant indictor that loaded onto its latent factor (p = 0.035), indicating a moderate effect size on the latent construct. There were no significant structural correlations found between latent constructs predicting depression or sleep duration, and covariances between latent variables were non-significant. Finally, academic pressure and financial stress did not have significant direct effects in the fitted model.

Conclusion:
In this sample, overall academic satisfaction appears to have a greater impact on student well-being than measurable stress factors in this sample. Despite its small sample size, this study emphasizes the necessity of including perceived academic experiences in mental health interventions. These findings add to the worldwide research by highlighting the numerous significances of satisfaction-based factors on student mental health in developing countries, especially with Study Satisfaction. Our research showed that long-term research will be needed to examine and determine what improvement to academic performance and satisfaction to improve mental health issues among college students within India and Southeast Asia and to also potentially expand to other countries.
